to his millions of fans Elvis Presley
was simply the king he didn't invent
rock and roll but he did carry it into
millions of living rooms around the
world then in August 1977 at the age of
42 the king proved that he was mortal
his death as they say was the end of an
era but it was also the start of an
extensive cover-up elvis sold nearly 800
million records that's one for every
family on earth without exception his 28
movies all made money at the box office
[Music]
[Applause]
as the years wore on the swivel hip idol
of the 50s became bloated and
prematurely old he remained an idol
nonetheless exalted in life and suddenly
in death the body of Elvis Aaron Presley
was taken to the Baptist Memorial
Hospital in Memphis there eight doctors
carried out an autopsy they could find
no illness or injury likely to result in
death but the County Medical Examiner
dr. Jerry Francisco overruled them
acting on his own initiative without
consulting the doctors who carried out
the autopsy dr. francisco announced that
Elvis Presley had died of a heart attack
was after the autopsy are that the cause
of death as a cardiac arrhythmia due to
undetermined causes Elvis's fans and his
fiance ginger Alden were left in the
dark all of us had heard at the same
time that it was a heart attack
do you believe right in the very
beginning I did I just you know III
think it God it was Elvis it's time to
go so I think he took him but uh but
then again in my mind there are a lot of
unanswered questions did it overs
Presley died of a heart attack or was
there another more sinister cause dr.
Francisco consistently refused to
release results of the autopsy or to be
interviewed eventually though one of the
eight doctors who examined Elvis's body
no Fleur endo agreed to tell what he
knew in my opinion I did not see any
evidence of a heart attack
morphologically morphologically meaning
meaning there was no gross evidence of a
heart attack so what was the cause of
death polypharmacy that Elvis Presley
died of the interaction of
several drugs most probably yes tests by
three separate laboratories confirmed
the doctors suspicions after analyzing
body tissue they reported traces of ten
separate drugs Elvis Presley had died
not from a heart attack but from drug
abuse I take vitamin E Elvis Presley was
no Street addict the drugs that killed
him illegal provided on prescription by
doctors who were so loyal starstruck or
whatever that they forgot the interest
of their patient as you'll see Elvis
Presley was prescribed more than five
thousand pills sedatives and
tranquilizers in the last seven months
of his life that's an average of 25
pills a day and as I said they were all
prescribed by doctors giving rise to the
question who killed Elvis what follows
is a special investigation of the death
of Elvis Presley from a reporting team
led by Geraldo Rivera of the American
Broadcasting Company it starts with a
reconstruction of the last few hours of
Elvis's life like many people in show
business he was a night owl his day
began after dark about an hour before
midnight on August the 15th 1977 Elvis
leaves his mansion Graceland's to keep a
dental appointment with dr. Lester
Hoffman with him or his fiancee ginger
Alden his cousin Billy Smith and his
longtime friend
Lester Hodge Elvis is due to start a new
concert tour the following day and wants
his teeth cleaned and two fillings
replaced we returned back to Graceland
at about 1:30
now my snot went upstairs and I'll just
turn on the television in his room to
relax for a little while then how this
started talking about his tour and
started talking about our wedding plans
and about announcing our engagement at
his memphis concert about 6:30 elvis
called downstairs for ricky stanley to
bring up his pack of medication to help
him get to sleep because he was so
nervous about he was always kind of
keyed up before starting a tour so ricky
brought it up elvis took his packet of
medication and started reading a book on
psychic energy then he thought that
would help him fall asleep then I fell
asleep so at about 8 o'clock I woke up
because that was restless saying that he
just couldn't sleep so he called
downstairs for Ricky again and Ricky
came up and brought up another pack of
medication a second packet right Elvis
took that and then I went back to sleep
the third time I was awakened again I
almost was starting to get up saying
that he still couldn't sleep he took the
book on psychic energy with him and he
started toward the bathroom door and I
said no don't fall asleep and he turned
and smiled at me and said oh okay I
won't then he went to the bathroom I
went back to sleep and I slept until 2
o'clock at that time I rolled over and I
looked at the clock and said 2 o'clock
then and the bathroom door was still
shut so at that time I went in and I
knocked on the door and no one answered
so I opened the door and that was when I
saw Elvis
according to the Medical Investigator
the body was purple or deep blue and
rigor mortis had set in Elvis had
apparently been dead for several hours
after a flurry of desperate activity two
paramedics arrived from the Memphis fire
department they needed help to lift
Elvis on to their stretcher he weighed
18 stone at the Baptist Memorial
Hospital an emergency resuscitation team
worked on Elvis but it soon became
obvious they could do nothing even at
this stage there was some suggestion
that drugs may have played a part in his
death
Don Wallach from the medical examiner's
office was handed a cryptic
from the police ep OD question mark do a
B mhm Elvis Presley overdose question
mark dead on arrival Baptist Memorial
Hospital at 3:30 in the afternoon Elvis
Aaron Presley was pronounced dead but
despite all the rumors and as it later
turned out all the hard evidence to the
contrary dr. jerry francisco continued
to maintain that Elvis had died of a
heart attack because of death has been
ascribed to hypertensive heart disease
and coronary artery heart disease as a
contributory factor but as we said
tissue samples analyzed at three
different laboratories told a different
story after two months of tests the
bioscience organization in Los Angeles
discovered that Elvis had been abusing a
wide range of drugs
these included codeine morphine quaalude
and so the list continues valium Valmet
Placid ill Nembutal phenobarbital
pentobarbital and beauty bar betal all
these drugs are Downers used to bring on
relaxation and sleep several are
addictive the findings were confirmed
and amplified by two other laboratories
the final step was to take the data to
two doctors for analysis first Los
Angeles toxicologist dr. matthew ellen
horn cause of death was in LA was an
overdose of codeine and an overdose of
meth a cologne or quad and that was
contributed to by an presence in the
bloodstream which indicated that the
patient had taken probably within the
previous 24 hours at least five
additional drugs known to produce
depression of the central nervous system
of depression of the brain a second
opinion from dr. Cyril wick one of the
foremost medical examiner's in the
United States there were several drugs
involved here the principal offender in
this case was Cody
which is a pain reliever but which is
known to have a CNS depressant effect
other drugs included valium
a tranquilizer eval mid a sedative
Placid ill a sedative phenobarbital a
sedative and buta Barbasol a sedative
it's incredible really that all these
drugs should have been given to the
patient
simultaneously there was one other drug
involved in the fuck alone which is a
tranquilizer knowing now about the
virtual laundry list of drugs
Rivera track down some of Elvis
Presley's closest friends David Stanley
was his stepbrother and worked at
Graceland's as a security man how often
did he see of us taking drugs every day
last two years of Elvis's life it was
every day what would elvis do if he
didn't get the drugs he wanted he'd get
upset sometimes we were in Vegas one
time and uh like we were for like eight
weeks you know and I was was getting his
drugs but it got to a point to where his
doctor wanted to shut him off in Vegas
and we couldn't reach the doctor anymore
so he jumped up on the table one day and
he pulled out his 35 and he says I'll
buy a goddamn drugstore if I have to he
says I'm gonna get what I want
he says you people better realize that
either you're with me or against me
either you're taking or you I'll buy
your plane ticket home when I first
started dating Elvis I was only I just
turned 20 at the time and no one ever
told me anything about what to expect
how the the group was or anything like
that I had to learn everything on my own
and the people that had been around of
us for all these years when I saw Elvis
takes something or which was mainly
before he would go to sleep I thought to
myself well it must not really be
harmful if it's prescribed and if these
people over the years of Elvis is still
doing it then it must not really be very
harmful for him I would say it was very
very bad and we knew if it continued
there's something like this would happen
we knew were just
be a matter of time Rick Stanley another
step brother was on duty at Graceland
the night Elvis died were you the person
who filled the prescription at Baptist
Memorial yes I was what was it it was a
lot the Lord is a very powerful morphine
type of class a narcotic then what did
you do with it well I went back to the
Elvis's house went upstairs and gave it
to him
approximately how many pills six to
eight pills was that common yes it was
it happened every night that you were on
duty oh yeah every night I was on duty
Elvis couldn't sleep without it
WS Nash was the pharmacist on duty when
Rick Stanley went to have the
prescription filled
it was Ford allowed a drug so powerful
but scripts are usually issued only in
serious cases and Elvis remember had
only had a couple of fillings
mr. Nash has now retired but he's still
haunted by the night of August the 15th
1977 and that been the only drug he had
taken it probably wouldn't have killed
him but in combination with others I was
almost surely there so far we've
established that Elvis Presley was
dependent on drugs drugs prescribed by
doctors who were supposed to help him
instead by helped Elvis to destroy him
you
it was once in charge of the Narcotics
Division of the Los Angeles Police
Department he retired to become a
private investigator and between 1969
and 1975 made several inquiries into the
people who were supplying Elvis Presley
with drugs his client was Vernon Presley
Elvis's own father in your opinion
should his attending physicians have
noticed the fact that he was abusing
these drugs he'd either have to be a
retarded alligator and not to notice
that or a totally incompetent medical
doctor in your opinion did the doctors
therefore contribute to Elvis Presley's
death was Elvis Presley murdered in a
sense I think anyone would Seban Dhin
and given something that causes their
death
for whatever reason is murder no I'm not
saying first-degree premeditated but
it's a degree of murder it's negligence
there's negligent homicide it could be
the same thing if you go to a bar and
the bartender serves you 25 drinks in a
row and you die there somebody's guilty
of your death that's negligent homicide
which is what another term is murder
Jack Kelly another former narcotics
officer and he too worked on the Presley
case he could get whatever he wanted
anytime you wanted it most of them that
I found were only too anxious to give it
to him how so tell me a little bit more
about that well there for a variety of
reasons for one thing you know there's
doctors who through carelessness or
irresponsibility will get their patients
addicted and there's doctors who do it
for monetary gain and there are doctors
dentists who do it because they're
because they're starstruck you find that
particularly out here in Hollywood
and unfortunately Elvis was a victim of
all three what about max appear
Mack Shapiro was a source of supply for
Elvis unquestionably you're sure of that
yes dr. max Shapiro dr. max to his
patients is certainly a very unusual
dentist to start with he makes house
calls he's also known in Hollywood as a
dr. feelgood a man who makes his
patients feel no pain by prescribing
narcotics whether there's a medical need
for them or not how did you respond to
being called a dr. feelgood
dr. painless would be alright but if I
worked on the patient they would never
have pain that was one of my very very
strong attitudes I would I myself am
afraid of pain and I understand what the
patient goes through I've been lied to
by doctors they told me things wouldn't
hurt and they treated me and it did hurt
did you make sure that Elvis suffered no
pain yes of course as all patients
outside the office Leiter Rivera asked
dr. max for a quick glance inside his
briefcase I don't like people even know
where I keep things because I've been
robbed but there are narcotics in there
now yes earlier Rivera managed a brief
look he saw 15 to 20 bottles of
narcotics but no dental tools max he was
like the rest of the doctors just gave
him any kind of medication he wanted
volunteered it like what
well barbiturates some narcotics
amphetamines things like that Gregor
oh yeah quaaludes delvis was noted like
taker and he never took thanks at all um
the only thing he took was sleeping
pills just to sleep just like everybody
else
I guess in his field but I've never
known Elvis to take any hard drives
dr. Elias Gannon was Elvis's doctor in
West bogus Rick Stanley disputes his
claim that he never provided the singer
with narcotics arrest no Elias did the
same thing now I'll say Elias to me he
seemed like he cared for hours but you
know after a while I fell into it like
the rest of them and just was giving him
whatever he wanted whenever you want
were there any doctors that said no to
not that I know uh and I was around him
for a long long time it's nothing I know
uh nobody hardly said no to Elvis
Presley dr. Gannon refused to be
interviewed but the doctor closest to
Elvis Presley was George Nikolas known
to members of the so-called Memphis
mafia as dr. Nick the records indicate
that especially in the last year of his
life you prescribed certain medications
- Elvis Presley in quite extraordinarily
large amounts
why
I can't come in on that and I don't
believe that it's true well the records
we have dr. and mm-hmm I'll say this as
gently as I possibly can indicate that
from January 20th 1977 until August 16th
1977 the day he died you prescribed to
Elvis Presley and the prescriptions are
all signed by you over 5000 schedule two
narcotics and or amphetamines that comes
out to something like 25 per day
I don't believe that
well is it something that you'd like to
refresh your recollection on or is it
something that you do not had to know
after that interview the state of
Tennessee began proceedings to stop dr.
Nick from practicing medicine
principally because of his treatment of
Elvis Presley we have charged him with
unprofessional conduct gross
incompetence gross ignorance gross
negligence and gross malpractice
concerning his dispensing of narcotic
substances specifically we have charged
him with dispensing prescribing and
issuing narcotic and controlled
substances not in good faith relief pain
and not for a legitimate legitimate
medical reason this is the worst case of
over prescribing of indiscriminate
prescribing that I have ever seen in my
time as a as an investigator with the
state of Tennessee the charges against
dr. NIC lists 16 patients including
Jerry Lee Lewis and the doctors own
daughter Chrissy but it was Elvis
Presley who got the lion's share more
than 5,400 pills in the last seven
months of his life 25 pills a day why
would you prescribe that amount
of drugs in that limited period of time
I think you didn't understand me I said
I don't think that I did you don't think
that you did I know I did you absolutely
saying that you did not friendship was
certainly one reason why doctor Nick
gave Elvis whatever he wanted
virtually whenever he wanted it but he
also depended heavily on Elvis and his
entourage for financial support doctor
Nick is in big trouble because of his
investment in this five million dollar
office complex only one-third of the
building is occupied the record shows
that the doctor borrowed $200,000 from
Elvis in 1975 and another $55,000 in
1977 much of the money went towards his
elaborate home in Memphis may I ask one
question do you have any regrets
right opposite the doctor's office is
the pharmacy where most of the
prescriptions were filled Jack Kirsch
never thought to question the dosage
more than 5,000 pills in seven months
600 on the day before Elvis died yes
possibly in my own man I would question
this thing but I never questioned the
doctor in light of what happened to
Elvis Presley do you have any regrets
I feel prescriptions
you know I did not give I did not give
the drugs to the patient I gave the
prescriptions to the doctor no I don't
have any regrets you were just following
orders I was following orders
for two years Memphis did more than
mourn its favorite son it also covered
up for him and for the people who had a
hand in his death point 1 there was no
real police investigation six hours
after Elvis was pronounced dead long
before the medical or scientific
evidence was available the Memphis
Police said the case was closed point to
medical authorities who searched
Graceland's for drugs now admit they
didn't search the resident nurses
Caravan where all the drugs were kept
0.3 Elvis Presley's stomach contents
were destroyed without being analyzed
0.4 there was no inquest point 5 no
attempt was made to find where Elvis got
his drugs 0.6 all photographs of the
death scene tox illogical reports and
notes made by the medical examiner were
destroyed little wonder city officials
suspect to cover-up the Elvis mystique
completely pervades the Memphis area and
if there are individuals who are so
concerned with a mystique that they do
not care to know the truth and I feel
that somewhere along the way someone has
to take it upon himself to see that the
truth is brought up but you definitely
feel there's a cover-up I'm positive
about that the question is not you know
did he die because his heart stopped of
course he did why did his heart stop why
did he have an irregular heartbeat
that's the question that needs to be
determined it needs to be made available
the problem for Memphis I suppose it was
a choice between the legend and the
truth in any event as a result of that
report a lot of things have happened
first a criminal investigation is
finally underway second a judge has
ordered the Baptist Memorial Hospital to
make the results of the autopsy a violin
to the producers of the television
program third dr. Mac Shapiro
or dr. feelgood is now under
investigation in California and finally
on top of his other troubles with the
law dr. Nick is being sued for more than
half a million dollars by another of his
patients who claims to have been a
victim of over-prescription but whatever
the truth about Elvis Presley nothing
you
hello I'm Liam bartlett thanks for
watching to keep up with the latest from
60 minutes Australia make sure you
subscribe to our channel you can also
download the 9 now app for full episodes
and other exclusive 60 minutes content